[improve][pip] PIP-297: Support terminating Function & Connector with the fatal exception (#21079)
apache/pulsar: pip/pip-297.md

Pulsar Function that processes messages from the topic.

**Function Framework** is a framework for running the Function instance.

**Function Context** is an interface that provides access to various information and resources for the connector or the
function. The function context is passed to the connector or the function when it is initialized, and then can be used
to interact with the Pulsar system.

The current implementation of the exception handler:
**Function instance thread**: The function framework initializes a thread for each function instance to handle the
core logic of the function/connector, including consuming messages from the Pulsar topic for the sink connector,
executing the logic of the function, producing messages to the Pulsar topic for the source connector, handling the
exception, etc.

**Exception handling logic**: The function itself can throw exceptions, and this thread will catch the exception and
then close the function. This means that the function will stop working until it is restarted manually or
automatically by the function framework.

> Even though it is not explicitly defined, there are two types of exceptions that could be handled for the function or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though it is not explicitly defined, there are two types of exceptions that should be handled by the function or
```

the framework.

- **Recoverable exception**: This is an exception that the function can recover from by itself, such as network
  connection issues, persistence issues, etc. The function can catch these exceptions and retry the operation until it
  succeeds or reaches a limit.
- **Unrecoverable exception**: This is an exception that the function cannot recover from by itself and needs to notify
  the framework to terminate it. These are fatal exceptions that indicate a configuration issue, a logic error, or an
  incompatible system. The function framework will catch these exceptions, report them to users, and terminate the

>   function.

Reviewer: Maybe Retriable and UnRetriable are more appropriate?

# Motivation

The current implementation of the connector and Pulsar Function exception handler cannot handle the unrecoverable
exceptions that are thrown outside of the function instance thread.

For example, suppose we have a sink connector that uses its own threads to batch-sink the data to an external system. If
any unrecoverable exceptions occur in those threads, the function instance thread will not be aware of them and will
not be able to terminate the connector. This will cause the connector to hang indefinitely. There is a related issue
here: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/9464

The same problem exists for the source connector. The source connector may also use a separate thread to fetch data from
an external system. If any fatal exceptions happen in that thread, the connector will also hang forever. This issue has
been observed for the Kafka source connector: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/9464. We have fixed it by adding
the notifyError method to the PushSource class in PIP-281: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/20807. However, this

> does not solve the same problem that all source connectors face.

Reviewer: Why the notifyError method can't solve the same problem for all source connectors? It's not a specific fix for Kafka connector, right?

Author: I added the explanation to the PIP.

The PIP-281 only affects `PushSource`. Not all source connectors are implemented based on `PushSource`, such as debezium connector.

The problem is same for the Pulsar Function. The user can also process messages asynchronously in a Pulsar Function. If
any fatal exceptions happen in the user's thread, the function framework can't handle the exception
correctly.

We need a way for the connector and function developers to throw unrecoverable exceptions outside the function instance

> thread. The function framework should catch these exceptions and terminate the function accordingly.

Reviewer: How about the retriable exceptions from the user's code? Will the function framework perform the retry automatically?

Reviewer: Just want to understand how the connectors or functions handle exceptions.

Author: I just added more details on how the function framework handles exceptions in part `The current implementation of the exception handler`. There is an answer to this question. PTAL.

# Goals

## In Scope

- This proposal will apply both to the Pulsar Function and the Pulsar Connector.
- Support throwing unrecoverable exceptions outside the function instance thread.
- The function framework should terminate the connector or function when there are any unrecoverable exceptions thrown
  asynchronously.

## Out of Scope

- The fixes of the exception-raising issue mentioned in the Motivation part for all the connectors are not included in
  this PIP. This PIP only provides the feature for the connector developer to raise the exception outside the function
  instance thread. The fixes should be in serval different PRs.

# High Level Design

Introduce a new method `raiseException` to the context. All the connector implementation code and the function code can
use this context and call the `raiseException` method to raise an unrecoverable exception to the function framework.

> After the connector or function raises the unrecoverable exception, the function instance thread will be interrupted.

Reviewer 2: we must define clearly the behaviour of this method when called from threads that are not the "main" thread of the function.

Author: I added a detailed behavior explaination to the `Design & Implementation Details` part. PTAL

> The function framework then could catch the exception, log it, and then terminate the function instance.

Reviewer: Is it possible for users to terminate the function instance directly for now?

Author: No. There is no direct way to terminate it. PIP-281 uses an indirect way to implement it by resending an exception record to the source connector.

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details

This PIP proposes to add a new method`raiseException`to the context `BaseContext`. This method allows the
connector or the function code to report an unrecoverable exception to the function framework. The `SinkContext`
and `SourceContext`
are all inherited from `BaseContext`. Therefore, all the sink connectors and source connectors can invoke this new
method. The pulsar function context class `Context` is also inherited from `BaseContext`. Therefore, the function code
can also invoke this new method.

In the `raiseException`, the function instance thread will be interrupted. The function instance thread can then catch
the interrupt exception and get the unrecoverable exception. The function framework then logs this exception,
reports to the metrics, and finally terminates the function instance.

## Public-facing Changes

### Public API

Introduce `raiseException` method to the `BaseContext`:

```java
public interface BaseContext {
    /**
     * Raise an unrecoverable exception to the function framework.
     *
     * @param e the exception to be raised
     */

>     void raiseException(Exception e);

Reviewer 2: let's use "Throwable" instead of Exception

Reviewer 2: I think that it is better to have two methods:
- raiseUnrecoverableError
- raiseTemporaryError

This way it is clearer for the framework what it is expected to happen, the parameter is only for descriptive purpose, the framework cannot decided if a problem is temporary or definitive given the exception (for instance an IOException may mean both temporary and permanent failures)

Author: I think the PIP has introduced the `Recoverable Exception` and `UnRecoverable Exception` which confused the reader. I have refined the PIP to make it clearer for the exception handling.

For the `TemporaryError` here, we don't need to notify the function framework, the function and the connector should handle it by itself.

>     void raiseException(Exception e);

Reviewer: How does the function framework know if the exception is a retriable exception or an un-retriable exception? From the description. It looks like the connector or function should only broadcast the un-retriable exception by this method. If yes, maybe we'd better change the method name to raiseUnRetriableException().

And if there is a way to terminate the Function Instance. IMO, it should be better than raising exceptions.

Author: Good suggestion. This method should only handle `un-retriable exception` or, to be clearer, `fatal exception`. 

I have renamed it to `raiseFatalException`.
